Panther’s Moon
I
In the entire village, he was the first to get up. Even the dog, a big hill mastiff called Sheroo, was
asleep in a corner of the dark room, curled up near the cold embers of the previous night’s fire.
Bisnu’s tousled head emerged from his blanket. He rubbed the sleep from his eyes, and sat up on his
haunches; then, gathering his wits, he crawled in the direction of the loud ticking that came from the
battered little clock which occupied the second most honoured place in a niche in the wall. The most
honoured place belonged to a picture of Ganesh, the god of learning, who had an elephant’s head and
a fat boy’s body.
Bringing his face close to the clock, Bisnu could just make out the dial-hands. It was five o’clock.
He had half-an-hour in which to get ready and leave.
He got up, in vest and underpants, and moved quietly towards the door. The soft tread of his bare
feet woke Sheroo, and the big black dog rose silently and padded behind the boy. The door opened
and closed, and then the boy and the dog were outside in the early dawn. The month was June, and
nights were warm, even in the Himalayan valleys; but there was fresh dew on the grass. Bisnu felt the
dew beneath his feet. He took a deep breath and began walking down to the stream.
The sound of the stream filled the small valley. At that early hour of the morning, it was the only
sound; but Bisnu was hardly conscious of it. It was a sound he lived with and took for granted. It was
only when he was over the hill, on his way to the distant town — and the sound of the stream grew
distant — that he really began to notice it. And it was only when the stream was too far away to be
heard that he really missed its sound.
He slipped out of his underclothes, gazed for a few moments at the goose-pimples rising on his
flesh, and then dashed into the shallow stream. As he went further in, the cold mountain water reached
his loins and navel, and he gasped with shock and pleasure. He drifted slowly with the current, swam
across to a small inlet which formed a fairly deep pool, and plunged beneath the water. Sheroo hated
cold water at this early hour. Had the sun been up, he would not have hesitated to join Bisnu. Now he
contented himself with sitting on a smooth rock and gazing placidly at the slim brown boy splashing
about in the clear water, in the widening light of dawn.
Bisnu did not stay long in the water. There wasn’t time. When he returned to the house, he found his
mother up, making tea and chapatties. His sister, Puja, was still asleep. She was a little older than
Bisnu, a pretty girl with large black eyes, good teeth and strong arms and legs. During the day, she
helped her mother in the house and in the fields. She did not go to the school with Bisnu. But when he
came home in the evenings, he would try teaching her some of the things he had learnt. Their father
was dead. Bisnu, at twelve, considered himself the head of the family.
He ate two chapatties, after spreading butter-oil on them. He drank a glass of hot sweet tea. His
mother gave two thick chapatties to Sheroo, and the dog wolfed them down in a few minutes. Then
she wrapped two chapatties and a gourd-curry in some big green leaves, and handed these to Bisnu.
This was his lunch-packet. His mother and Puja would take their meal afterwards.
When Bisnu was dressed, he stood with folded hands before the picture of Ganesh. Ganesh is the
god who blesses all beginnings. The author who begins to write a new book, the banker who opens a
new ledger, the traveller who starts on a journey, all invoke the kindly help of Ganesh. And as Bisnu
made a journey every day, he never left without the goodwill of the elephant-headed god.
How, one might ask, did Ganesh get his elephant’s head?
When born, he was a beautiful child. Parvati, his mother, was so proud of him that she went about
showing him to everyone. Unfortunately she made the mistake of showing the child to that envious
planet, Saturn, who promptly burnt off poor Ganesh’s head. Parvati in despair went to Brahma, the
Creator, for a new head for her son. He had no head to give her; but he advised her to search for some
man or animal caught in a sinful or wrong act. Parvati wandered about until she came upon an
elephant sleeping with its head the wrong way, that is, to the south. She promptly removed the
elephant’s head and planted it on Ganesh’s shoulders, where it took root.
Bisnu knew this story. He had heard it from his mother.
Wearing a white shirt and black shorts, and a pair of worn white keds, he was ready for his long
walk to school, five miles up the mountain.
His sister woke up just as he was about to leave. She pushed the hair away from her face, and gave
Bisnu one of her rare smiles.
‘I hope you have not forgotten,’she said.
‘Forgotten?’said Bisnu, pretending innocence. ‘Is there anything I am supposed to remember?’
‘Don’t tease me. You promised to buy me a pair of bangles, remember? I hope you won’t spend the
money on sweets, as you did last time.’
‘Oh, yes, your bangles,’said Bisnu. ‘Girls have nothing better to do than waste money on trinkets.
Now, don’t lose your temper! I’ll get them for you. Red and gold are the colours you want?’
‘Yes, brother,’said Puja gently, pleased that Bisnu had remembered the colours. ‘And for your
dinner tonight we’ll make you something special. Won’t we, mother?’
‘Yes. But hurry up and dress. There is some ploughing to be done today. The rains will soon be
here, if the gods are kind.’
‘The monsoon will be late this year,’said Bisnu. ‘Mr. Nautiyal, our teacher, told us so. He said it
had nothing to do with the gods.’
‘Be off, you are getting late,’said Puja, before Bisnu could begin an argument with his mother. She
was diligently winding the old clock. It was quite light in the room. The sun would be up any minute.
Bisnu shouldered his school-bag, kissed his mother, pinched his sister’s cheeks, and left the house.
He started climbing the steep path up the mountain-side. Sheroo bounded ahead; for he, too, always
went with Bisnu to school.
Five miles to school. Everyday, except Sunday, Bisnu walked five miles to school; and in the
evening, he walked home again. There was no school in his own small village of Manjari, for the
village consisted of only five families. The nearest school was at Kemptee, a small township on the
bus-route through the district of Garhwal. A number of boys walked to school, from distances of two
or three miles; their villages were not quite as remote as Manjari. But Bisnu’s village lay right at the
bottom of the mountain, a drop of over two thousand feet from Kemptee. There was no proper road
between the village and the town.
In Kemptee, there was a school, a small mission hospital, a post office and several shops. In
Manjari village there were none of these amenities. If you were sick, you stayed at home until you got
well; if you were very sick, you walked or were carried to the hospital, up the five-mile path. If you
wanted to buy something, you went without it; but if you wanted it very badly, you could walk the five
miles to Kemptee.
Manjari was known as the Five Mile Village.
Twice a week, if there were any letters, a postman came to the village. Bisnu usually passed the
postman on his way to and from school.
There were other boys in Manjari village, but Bisnu was the only one who went to school. His
mother would not have fussed if he had stayed at home and worked in the fields. That was what the
other boys did; all except lazy Chittru, who preferred fishing in the stream or helping himself to the
fruit of other people’s trees. But Bisnu went to school. He went because he wanted to. No one could
force him to go; and no one could stop him from going. He had set his heart on receiving a good
schooling. He wanted to read and write as well as anyone in the big world, the world that seemed to
begin only where the mountains ended. He felt cut off from the world in his small valley. He would
rather live at the top of a mountain than at the bottom of one. That was why he liked climbing to
Kemptee, it took him to the top of the mountain; and from its ridge he could look down on his own
valley, to the north, and on the wide endless plains stretching towards the south.
The plainsman looks to the hills for the needs of his spirit; but the hillman looks to the plains for a
living.
Leaving the village and the fields below him, Bisnu climbed steadily up the bare hillside, now dry
and brown. By the time the sun was up, he had entered the welcome shade of an oak and
rhododendron forest: Sheroo went bounding ahead, chasing squirrels and barking at langoor
monkeys.
A colony of langoors lived in the oak forest. They fed on oak leaves, acorns, and other green
things, and usually remained in the trees, coming down to the ground only to bask or play in the sun.
They were beautiful, supple-limbed animals, with black faces and silver-grey coats and long,
sensitive tails. They leapt from tree to tree with great agility. The young ones wrestled on the grass
like boys.
A dignified community, the langoors did not have the cheekiness or dishonest habits of the red
monkeys of the plains; they did not approach dogs or humans. But they had grown used to Bisnu’s
comings and goings, and did not fear him. Some of the older ones would watch him quietly, a little
puzzled. They did not go near the town, because the Kemptee boys threw stones at them; and anyway,
the oak forest gave them all the food they required.
Emerging from the trees, Bisnu crossed a small brook. Here he stopped to drink the fresh clean
water of a spring. The brook tumbled down the mountain, and joined the river a little below Bisnu’s
village. Coming from another direction was a second path, and at the junction of the two paths Sarru
was waiting for him.
Sarru came from a small village about three miles from Bisnu’s and closer to the town. He had two
large milk cans slung over his shoulders. Every morning he carried this milk to town, selling one can
to the school and the other to Mrs. Taylor, the lady doctor at the small mission hospital. He was a
little older than Bisnu but not as well-built.
They hailed each other, and Sarru fell into step beside Bisnu. They often met at this spot, keeping
each other company for the remaining two miles to Kemptee.
‘There was a panther in our village last night,’said Sarru.
This information interested but did not excite Bisnu. Panthers were common enough in the hills and
did not usually present a problem except during the winter months, when their natural prey was
scarce; then, occasionally, a panther would take to haunting the outskirts of a village, seizing a
careless dog or a stray goat.
‘Did you lose any animals?’ asked Bisnu.
‘No. It tried to get into the cow-shed, but the dogs set up an alarm. We drove it off.’
‘It must be the same one which came around last winter. We lost a calf and two dogs in our
village.’
‘Wasn’t that the one the shikaris wounded? I hope it hasn’t became a cattle-lifter.’
‘It could be the same. It has a bullet in its leg. These hunters are the people who cause all the
trouble. They think it’s easy to shoot a panther. It would be better if they missed altogether; but they
usually wound it.’
‘And then the panther’s too slow to catch the barking-deer, and starts on our own animals.’
‘We’re lucky it didn’t become a man-eater. Do you remember the man-eater six years ago? I was
very small then. My father told me all about it. Ten people were killed in our valley alone. What
happened to it?’
‘I don’t know. Some say it poisoned itself when it ate the head-man of another village.’
Bisnu laughed. ‘No one liked that old villain. He must have been a man-eater himself in some
previous existence!’ They linked arms and scrambled up the stony path. Sheroo began barking and ran
ahead. Someone was coming down the path.
It was Mela Ram, the postman.
II
‘Any letters for us?’ asked Bisnu and Sarru together.
They never received any letters but that did not stop them from asking. It was one way of finding
out who had received letters.
‘You’re welcome to all of them,’said Mela Ram, ‘if you’ll carry my bag for me.’
‘Not today,’said Sarru. ‘We’re busy today. Is there a letter from Corporal Ghanshyam for his
family?’
‘Yes, there is a postcard for his people. He is posted on the Ladakh border now, and finds it very
cold there.’
Postcards, unlike sealed letters, were considered public property and were read by everyone. The
senders knew that, too; and so Corporal Ghanshyam Singh was careful to mention that he expected a
promotion very soon. He wanted everyone in his village to know it.
Mela Ram, complaining of sore feet, continued on his way, and the boys carried on up the path. It
was eight o’clock when they reached Kemptee. Dr. Taylor’s out-patients were just beginning to
trickle in at the hospital gate. The doctor was trying to prop up a rose-creeper which had blown down
during the night. She liked attending to her plants in the mornings, before starting on her patients. She
found this helped her in her work; there was a lot in common between ailing plants and ailing people.
Dr. Taylor was fifty, white-haired but fresh in the face and full of vitality. She had been in India for
twenty years; and ten of these had been spent working in the hill regions.
She saw Bisnu coming down the road. She knew about the boy and his long walk to school and
admired him for his keenness and sense of purpose. She wished there were more like him.
Bisnu greeted her shyly. Sheroo barked and put his paws up on the gate.
‘Yes, there’s a bone for you,’said Dr. Taylor. She often put aside bones for the big black dog, for
she knew that Bisnu’s people could not afford to give the dog a regular diet of meat —though he did
well enough on milk and chapatties.
She threw the bone over the gate, and Sheroo caught it before it fell. The school bell began ringing,
and Bisnu broke into a run. Sheroo loped along behind the boy.
When Bisnu entered the school gate, Sheroo sat down on the grass of the compound. He would
remain there until the lunch-break. He knew of various ways of amusing himself during school hours,
and had friends among the bazaar dogs. But just then he didn’t want company. He had his bone to get
on with.
Mr. Nautiyal, Bisnu’s teacher, was in a bad mood. He was a keen rose-grower, and only that
morning, on getting up and looking out of his bedroom window, had been horrified to see a herd of
goats in his garden. He had chased them down the road with a stick, but the damage had already been
done. His prize roses had all been consumed.
Mr. Nautiyal had been so upset that he had gone without his breakfast. He had also cut himself
whilst shaving. Thus, his mood had gone from bad to worse. Several times during the day he brought
down his ruler on the knuckles of any boy who irritated him. Bisnu was one of his best pupils. But
even Bisnu irritated him by asking too many questions about a new sum which Mr. Nautiyal didn’t
feel like explaining.
That was the kind of day it was for Mr. Nautiyal. Most school teachers know similar days.
‘Poor Mr. Nautiyal,’ thought Bisnu. ‘I wonder why he’s so upset. It must be because of his pay. He
doesn’t get much money. But he’s a good teacher. I hope he doesn’t take another job.’
But after Mr. Nautiyal had taken his lunch, his mood improved (as it always did, after a meal), and
the rest of the day passed serenely. Armed with a bundle of homework, Bisnu came out from the
school compound at four o’clock, and was immediately joined by Sheroo. He proceeded down the
road in the company of several of his class fellows. But he did not linger long in the bazaar. There
were five miles to walk, and he did not like to get home too late. Usually he reached his house just as
it was beginning to get dark.
Sarru had gone home long ago, and Bisnu had to make the return journey on his own. It was a good
opportunity for memorising the words of an English poem he had been set to learn.
Bisnu had reached the little brook when he remembered the bangles he had promised to buy for his
sister.
‘Oh, I’ve forgotten them again,’ he said aloud. ‘Now I’ll catch it: and she’s probably made
something special for my dinner!’
Sheroo, to whom these words were addressed, paid no attention, but bounded off into the oak
forest. Bisnu looked around for the monkeys but they were nowhere to be seen.
‘Strange,’ he thought. ‘I wonder why they have disappeared.’
He was startled by a sudden sharp cry, followed by a fierce yelp. He knew at once that Sheroo was
in trouble. The noise came from the bushes down the khud, into which the dog had rushed but a few
seconds previously.
Bisnu jumped off the path and ran down the slope towards the bushes. There was no dog and not a
sound. He whistled and called but there was no response. Then he saw something lying on the dry
grass. He picked it up. It was a portion of a dog’s collar, stained with blood. It was Sheroo’s collar,
and Sheroo’s blood.
Bisnu did not search further. He knew, without a doubt, that Sheroo had been seized by a panther.
No other animal could have attacked so silently and swiftly and carried off a big dog without a
struggle. Sheroo was dead — must have been dead within seconds of being caught and flung into the
air. Bisnu knew the danger that lay in wait for him if he followed the blood-trail through the trees. The
panther would attack anyone who interfered with its meal.
With tears starting in his eyes, Bisnu carried on down the path to the village. His fingers still
clutched the little bit of bloodstained collar that was all that was left to him of his dog.
III
Bisnu was not a very sentimental boy, but he sorrowed for his dog, who had been his companion on
many a hike into the hills and forests. He did not sleep that night, but turned restlessly from side to
side, moaning softly. After some time he felt Puja’s hand on his head. She began stroking his brow. He
took her hand in his own, and the clasp of her rough, warm familiar hand gave him a feeling of
comfort and security.
Next morning, when he went down to the stream to bathe, he missed the presence of his dog. He did
not stay long in the water. It wasn’t so much fun when there was no Sheroo to watch him.
When Bisnu’s mother gave him his food, she told him to be careful, and to hurry home that evening.
A panther, even if it is only a cowardly lifter of sheep or dogs, is not to be trifled with. And this
particular panther had shown some daring by seizing the dog even before it was dark.
Still, there was no question of staying away from school. If Bisnu remained at home every time a
panther put in an appearance, he might just as well stop going to school altogether.
He set off even earlier than usual, and reached the meeting of the paths long before Sarru. He did
not wait for his friend, because he did not feel like talking about the loss of his dog. It was not the day
for the postman, and so Bisnu reached Kemptee without meeting anyone on the way. He tried creeping
past the hospital-gate unnoticed, but Dr. Taylor saw him, and the first thing she said was: ‘Where’s
Sheroo? I’ve got something for him.’
When Dr. Taylor saw the boy’s face, she knew at once that something was wrong.
‘What is it, Bisnu?’she asked. She looked quickly up and down the road. ‘Is it Sheroo?’
He nodded gravely.
‘A panther took him,’ he said.
‘In the village.’
‘No, while we were walking home through the forest. I did not see anything — but I heard.’
Dr. Taylor knew that there was nothing she could say that would console him, and she tried to
conceal the bone which she had brought out for the dog; but Bisnu noticed her hiding it behind her
back, and the tears welled up in his eyes. He turned away and began running down the road.
His schoolfellows noticed Sheroo’s absence and questioned Bisnu. He had to tell them everything.
They were full of sympathy; but they were also quite thrilled at what had happened, and kept
pestering Bisnu for all the details. There was a lot of noise in the classroom, and Mr. Nautiyal had to
call for order. When he learnt what had happened, he patted Bisnu on the head and told him that he
need not attend school for the rest of the day. But Bisnu did not want to go home. After school, he got
into a fight with one of the boys, and that helped him to forget.
IV
The panther that plunged the village into an atomsphere of gloom and terror may not have been the
same panther that took Sheroo; there was no way of knowing, and it would have made no difference,
because the panther that came by night and struck at the people of Manjari was that most-feared of
wild creatures, a man-eater.
Nine-year-old Sanjay, son of Kalam Singh, was the first child to be attacked by the panther.
Kalam Singh’s house was the last in the village, and nearest the stream. Like the other houses, it
was quite small, just a room above and a stable below, with steps leading up from outside the house.
He lived there with his wife, two sons (Sanjay was the youngest) and little daughter Basanti who had
just turned three.
Sanjay had brought his father’s cows home after grazing them on the hillside in the company of
other children. He had also brought home an edible wild plant which his mother cooked into a tasty
dish for their evening meal. They had their food at dusk, sitting on the floor of their single room, and
soon after settled down for the night. Sanjay curled up in his favourite spot, with his head near the
door, where he got a little fresh air. As the nights were warm, the door was usually left a little ajar.
Sanjay’s mother piled ash on the embers of the fire, and the family was soon asleep.
None heard the stealthy padding of a panther approaching the door, pushing it wider open. But
suddenly there were sounds of a frantic struggle, and Sanjay’s stifled cries were mixed with the grunts
of the panther. Kalam Singh leapt to his feet with a shout. The panther had dragged Sanjay out of the
door and was pulling him down the steps when Kalam Singh started battering at the animal with a
large stone. The rest of the family screamed in terror, rousing the entire village. A number of men
came to Kalam Singh’s assistance, and the panther was driven off; but Sanjay lay unconscious.
Someone brought a lantern, and the boy’s mother screamed when she saw her small son with his
head lying in a pool of blood. It looked as if the side of his head had been eaten off by the panther. But
he was still alive; and as Kalam Singh plastered ash on the boy’s head to stop the bleeding, he found
that though the scalp had been torn off one side of the head, the bare bone was smooth and unbroken.
‘He won’t live through the night,’said a neighbour. ‘We’ll have to carry him down to the river in
the morning.’
The dead were always cremated on the banks of a small river which flowed past Manjari village.
Suddenly the panther, still prowling about the village, called out in rage and frustration, and the
villagers rushed to their homes in a panic, and barricaded themselves in for the night.
Sanjay’s mother sat by the boy for the rest of the night, weeping and watching. Towards dawn he
started to moan and show signs of coming round. At this sign of returning consciousness, Kalam Singh
rose determinedly and looked round for his stick.
He told his elder son to remain behind with the mother and daughter, as he was going to take Sanjay
to Dr. Taylor at the hospital.
‘See, he is moaning and in pain,’said Kalam Singh. ‘That means he has a chance to live if he can
be treated at once.’
With a stout stick in his hand, and Sanjay on his back, Kalam Singh set off on the two miles of hard
mountain track to the hospital at Kemptee. His son, a blood-stained cloth around his head, was
moaning but still unconscious. When at last Kalam Singh climbed up through the last fields below the
hospital, he asked for the doctor and stammered out an account of what had happened.
It was a terrible injury, as Dr. Taylor discovered. The bone over almost one third of the head was
bare, and the scalp was torn all round. As the father told his story, the doctor cleaned and dressed the
wound, and then gave Sanjay a shot of penicillin to prevent sepsis. Later, Kalam Singh carried the
boy home again.
V
After this, the panther went away for some time. But the people of Manjari could not be sure of its
whereabouts. They kept to their houses after dark, and shut their doors. Bisnu had to stop going to
school, because there was no one to accompany him and it was dangerous to go alone. This worried
him, because his final exam was only a few weeks off, and he would be missing important classwork.
When he wasn’t in the fields, helping with the sowing of rice and maize, he would be sitting in the
shade of a chestnut tree, going through his well-thumbed second-hand school books. He had no other
reading, except for a copy of the Ramayana (epic of the Hindu gods and heroes) and a Hindi
translation of Alice in Wonderland. These were well-preserved, read only in fits and starts, and
usually kept locked in his mother’s old tin trunk.
Sanjay had nightmares for several nights, and woke up screaming; but with the resilience of youth,
he quickly recovered. At the end of the week he was able to walk to the hospital, though his father
always accompanied him. Even a desperate panther will hesitate to attack a party of two. Sanjay, with
his thin little face and huge bandaged head, looked a pathetic figure; but he was getting better and the
wound looked healthy.
Bisnu often went to see him, and the two boys spent long hours together near the stream. Sometimes
Chittru would join them, and they would try catching fish with a home-made net. They were often
successful in taking home one or two mountain trout. Sometimes Bisnu and Chittru wrestled in the
shallow water, or on the grassy banks of the stream. Chittru was a chubby boy, with a broad chest,
strong legs and thighs, and when he used his weight he got Bisnu under him; but Bisnu was hard and
wiry, and had very strong wrists and fingers. When he had Chittru in a vice, the bigger boy would cry
out and give up the struggle. Sanjay could not join in these games.
He had never been a very strong boy, and he needed plenty of rest if his wounds were to heal well.
The panther had not been seen for over a week, and the people of Manjari were beginning to hope
that it might have moved on, over the mountain or further down the valley.
‘I think I can start going to school again,’said Bisnu. ‘The panther has gone away.’
‘Don’t be too sure,’said Puja, ‘The moon is full these days, and perhaps it is only being cautious.’
‘Wait a few days,’said their mother. ‘It is better to wait. Perhaps you could go the day after
tomorrow, when Sanjay goes to the hospital with his father. Then you will not be alone.’
And so, two days later, Bisnu went up to Kemptee with Sanjay and Kalam Singh. Sanjay’s wound
had almost healed over. Little islets of flesh had grown over the bone. Dr. Taylor told him that he
need come to see her only once a fortnight, instead of every third day.
Bisnu went to his school, and was given a warm welcome by his friends and by Mr. Nautiyal.
‘You’ll have to work hard,’said his teacher. ‘You have to catch up with the others. If you like, I can
give you some extra time after classes.’
‘Thank you sir, but it will make me late,’said Bisnu. ‘I must get home before it is dark, otherwise
my mother will worry. I think the panther has gone, but nothing is certain.’
‘Well, you mustn’t take risks. Do your best, Bisnu. Work hard, and you’ll soon catch up with your
lessons.’
Sanjay and Kalam Singh were waiting for him outside the school. Together they took the path down
to Manjari, passing the postman on the way. Mela Ram said that he had heard that the panther was in
another district, and that there was nothing to fear; he was on his rounds again.
Nothing happened on the way. The langoors were back in their favourite part of the forest. Bisnu
got home just as the kerosene-lamp was being lit. Puja met him at the door with a winsome smile.
‘Did you get the bangles?’she asked.
But Bisnu had forgotten again.
VI
There had been a thunderstorm and some rain — a short, sharp shower which gave the villagers hope
that the monsoon would arrive on time. It brought out the thunder-lilies — pink, crocus-like flowers
which sprang up on the hillsides immediately after a summer shower.
Bisnu, on his way home from school, was caught in the rain. He knew the shower would not last, so
he took shelter in a small cave and, to pass the time, began doing sums, scratching figures in the damp
earth with end of a stick.
When the rain stopped, he came out from the cave and continued down the path. He wasn’t in a
hurry. The rain had made everything smell fresh and good. The scent from fallen pine-needles rose
from the wet earth. The leaves of the oak trees had been washed clean, and a light breeze turned them
about, showing their silver under-sides. The birds, refreshed and high-spirited, set up a terrific noise.
The worst offenders were the yellow-bottomed bulbuls, who squabbled and fought in the blackberry
bushes. A Barbet, high up in the branches of a deodar, set up its querulous, plaintive call. And a flock
of bright green parrots came swooping down the hill, to settle in a wild plum tree and feast on the
under-ripe fruit. The langoors, too, had been revived by the rain; they leapt friskily from tree,
greeting Bisnu with little grunts.
He was almost out of the oak forest when he heard a faint bleating. Presently a little goat came
stumbling up the path towards him. The kid was far from home, and must have strayed from the rest of
the herd. But it was not yet conscious of being lost. It came to Bisnu with a hop, skip and a jump, and
started nuzzling against his legs like a cat.
‘I wonder who you belong to,’ mused Bisnu, stroking the little creature. ‘You’d better come home
with me until someone claims you.’
He didn’t have to take the kid in his arms. It was used to humans and followed close at his heels.
Now that darkness was coming on, Bisnu walked a little faster.
He had not gone very far when he heard the sawing grunt of a panther.
The sound came from the hill to the right, and Bisnu judged the distance to be anything from a
hundred to two hundred yards. He hesitated on the path, wondering what to do; then he picked the kid
up in his arms, and hurried on in the direction of home and safety.
The panther called again, much closer now. If it was an ordinary panther, it would go away on
finding that the kid was with Bisnu. If it was the man-eater it would not hesitate to attack the boy, for
no man-eater fears a human. There was no time to lose, and there did not seem much point in running.
Bisnu looked up and down the hillside. The forest was far behind him, and there were only a few
trees in his vicinity. He chose a spruce.
The branches of the Himalayan spruce are very brittle and snap easily beneath a heavy weight.
They were strong enough to support Bisnu’s light frame. It was unlikely they would take the weight of
a full-grown panther. At least that was what Bisnu hoped.
Holding the kid with one arm, Bisnu gripped a low branch and swung himself up into the tree. He
was a good climber. Slowly but confidently he climbed half-way up the tree, until he was about
twelve feet above the ground. He couldn’t go any higher without risking a fall.
He had barely settled himself in the crook of a branch when the panther came into the open, running
into the clearing at a brisk trot. This was no stealthy approach, no waring stalking of its prey. It was
the man-eater, all right. Bisnu felt a cold shiver run down his spine. He felt a little sick.
The panther stood in the clearing with a slight thrusting forward of the head. This gave it the
appearance of gazing intently and rather short-sightedly at some invisible object in the clearing. But
there is nothing short-sighted about a panther’s vision; its sight and hearing are acute.
Bisnu remained motionless in the tree and sent up a prayer to all the gods he could think of; but the
kid began bleating. The panther looked up, and gave its deepthroated, rasping grunt — a fearsome
sound, calculated to strike terror into any tree-borne animal. Many a monkey, petrified by a panther’s
roar, has fallen from its perch to make a meal for Mr. Spots. The man-eater was trying the same
technique on Bisnu. But though the boy was trembling with fright, he clung firmly to the base of the
spruce tree.
The panther did not make any attempt to leap into the tree. Perhaps it knew instinctively that this
was not the type of tree that it could climb. Instead it described a semi-circle round the tree, keeping
its face turned towards Bisnu. Then it disappeared into the bushes.
The man-eater was cunning. It hoped to put the boy off his guard, perhaps entice him down from the
tree; for a few seconds later, with a half-humorous growl, it rushed back into the clearing and then
stopped, staring up at the boy in some surprise. The panther was getting frustrated. It snarled, and
putting its forefeet up against the tree-trunk, began scratching at the bark in the manner of an ordinary
domestic cat. The tree shook at each thud of the beasts’ paw.
Bisnu began shouting for help.
The moon had not yet come up. Down in Manjari village, Bisnu’s mother and sister stood in their
lighted doorway, gazing anxiously up the pathway. Every now and then. Puja would turn to take a look
at the small clock.
Sanjay’s father appeared in a field below. He had a kerosene lantern in his hand.
‘Sister, isn’t your boy home as yet?’ he asked.
‘No, he hasn’t arrived. We are very worried. He should have been home an hour ago. Do you think
the panther will be about tonight? There’s going to be a moon.’
‘True, but it will be dark for another hour. I will fetch the other menfolk, and we will go up the
mountain for your boy. There may have been a landslip during the rain. Perhaps the path has been
washed away.’
‘Thank you, brother. But arm yourselves, just in case the panther is about.’
‘I will take my spear,’said Kalam Singh. ‘I have sworn to spear that devil when I find him. There
is some evil-spirit dwelling in the beast, and it must be destroyed!’
‘I am coming with you,’said Puja.
‘No, you cannot go,’said her mother. ‘It’s bad enough that Bisnu is in danger. You stay at home with
me. This is work for men.’
‘I shall be safe with them,’ insisted Puja. ‘I am going, mother!’ And she jumped down the
embankment into the field, and followed Sanjay’s father through the village.
Ten minutes later, two men armed with axes had joined Kalam Singh in the courtyard of his house,
and the small party moved silently and swiftly up the mountain path. Puja walked in the middle of the
group, holding the lantern. As soon as the village lights were hidden by a shoulder of the hill, the men
began to shout —both to frighten the panther, if it was about, and to give themselves courage.
Bisnu’s mother closed the front door, and turned to the image of Ganesh the God for comfort and
help.
Bisnu’s calls were carried on the wind, and Puja and the men heard him while they were still halfa-mile away. Their own shouts increased in volume, and, hearing their voices, Bisnu felt strength
return to his shaking limbs. Emboldened by the approach of his own people, he began shouting insults
at the snarling panther, then throwing twings and small branches at the enraged animal. The kid added
its bleats to the boy’s shouts, the birds took up the chorus, the langoors squealed and grunted, the
searchers shouted themselves hoarse, and the panther howled with rage. The forest had never before
been so noisy.
As the search-party drew near, they could hear the panther’s savage snarls, and hurried, fearing that
perhaps Bisnu had been seized. Puja began to run.
‘Don’t rush ahead, girl,’said Kalam Singh. ‘Stay between us.’
The panther, now aware of the approaching humans, stood still in the middle of the clearing, head
thrust forward in a familiar stance. There seemed too many men for one panther. When the animal saw
the light of the lantern dancing between the trees, it turned, snarled defiance and hate, and without
another look at the boy in the tree, disappeared into the bushes. It was not yet ready for a showdown.
VII
Nobody turned up to claim the little goat, so Bisnu kept it. A goat was a poor substitute for a dog; but,
like Mary’s lamb, it followed Bisnu wherever he went, and the boy couldn’t help being touched by its
devotion. He took it down to the stream, where it would skip about in the shallows and nibble the
sweet grass that grew on the banks.
As for the panther, frustrated in its attempt on Bisnu’s life, it did not wait long before attacking
another human.
It was Chittru who came running down the path one afternoon, bubbling excitedly about the panther
and the postman.
Chittru, deeming it safe to the gathering ripe bilberries in the daytime, had walked about half-amile up the path from the village when he had stumbled across Mela Ram’s mail-bag lying on the
ground. Of the postman himself there was no sign. But a trail of blood led through the bushes.
Once again, a party of men headed by Kalam Singh and accompanied by Bisnu and Chittru, went
out to look for the postman; but though they found Mela Ram’s bloodstained clothes, they could not
find his body. The panther had made no mistake this time.
It was to be several weeks before Manjari had a new postman.
A few days after Mela Ram’s disappearance, an old woman was sleeping with her head near the
open door of her house. She had been advised to sleep inside with the door closed; but the nights
were hot, and anyway the old woman was a little deaf, and in the middle of the night, an hour before
moonrise, the panther seized her by the throat. Her strangled cry woke her grown-up son, and all the
men in the village woke up at his shouts and came running.
The panther dragged the old woman out of the house and down the steps but left her when the men
approached with their axes and spears, and made off into the bushes. The old woman was still alive,
and the men made a rough stretcher of bamboo and vines and started carrying her up the path; but they
had not gone far when she began to cough, and because of her terrible throat-wounds her lungs
collapsed, and she died.
It was the ‘dark of the month’ — the week of the new moon when nights are darkest.
Bisnu, closing the front door and lighting the kerosene lantern, said, ‘I wonder where that panther is
tonight!’
The panther was busy in another village, Sarru’s village.
A woman and her daughter had been out in the evening, bedding the cattle down in the stable. The
girl had gone into the house, and the woman was following. As she bent down to go in at the low
door, the panther sprang from the bushes. Fortunately, one of its paws hit the door-post and broke the
force of the attack, or the woman would have been killed. When she cried out, the men came round
shouting, and the panther slunk off. The woman had deep scratches on her back and was badly
shocked.
Next day a small party of villagers presented themselves in front of the magistrate’s office at
Kemptee, and demanded that something be done about the panther; but the magistrate was away on
tour, and there was no one else in Kemptee who had a gun. Mr. Nautiyal met the villagers, and
promised to write to a well-known shikari, but said that it would be at least a fortnight before he
could come.
Bisnu was fretting because he could not go to school. Most boys would be only too happy to miss
school; but when you are living in a remote village in the mountains, and having an education is the
only way of seeing the world, you look forward to going to school, even if it is five miles from home.
Bisnu’s exams were only two weeks off, and he didn’t want to remain in the same class while the
others were promoted. Besides, he knew he could pass even though he had missed a number of
lessons. But he had to sit for the exams; he couldn’t miss them.
‘Cheer up, Bhaiya,’said Puja, as they sat drinking glasses of hot tea after their evening meal. ‘The
panther may go away once the rains break.’
‘Even the rains are late this year,’said Bisnu. ‘It’s so hot and dry. Can’t we open the door?’
‘And be dragged down the steps by the panther?’said his mother. ‘It isn’t safe to have the window
open, let alone the door.’ And she went to the small window — through which a cat could have found
difficulty in passing — and bolted it firmly.
With a sigh of resignation Bisnu threw off all his clothes except his underwear, and stretched
himself out on the earthen floor.
‘We will be rid of the beast soon,’said his mother. ‘I know it in my heart. Our prayers will be
heard, and you shall go to school and pass your exams.’
To cheer up her children, she told them a humorous story which had been handed down to her by
her grandmother. It was all about a tiger, a panther and a bear, the three of whom were made to feel
very foolish by a thief hiding in the hollow trunk of a banyan tree. Bisnu was sleepy and did not listen
very attentively; he dropped off to sleep before the story was finished.
When he woke, it was dark, and his mother and sister were asleep on the cot. He wondered what it
was that had woken him. He would hear his sister’s easy breathing, and the steady ticking of the
clock. Far away, an owl hooted — an unlucky sign, his mother would have said; but she was asleep,
and Bisnu was not superstitious.
And then he heard something scratching at the door, and the hair on his head felt tight and prickly. It
was like a cat scratching, only louder. The door creaked a little whenever it felt the impact of the paw
— a heavy paw, as Bisnu could tell from the dull sound it made.
‘It’s the panther,’ he muttered under his breath, sitting up on the hard floor.
The door, he felt, was strong enough to resist the panther’s weight; and, if he set up an alarm, he
could rouse the village. But the middle of the night was no time for the bravest of men to tackle a
panther.
In a corner of the room stood a long bamboo stick with a sharp knife tied to one end, which Bisnu
sometimes used for spearing fish. Crawling on all fours across the room, he grasped the homemade
spear; and then, scrambling on to a cupboard, he drew level with the skylight window. He could get
his head and shoulders through the window.
‘What are you doing up there?’said Puja, who had woken up at the sound of Bisnu shuffling about
the room.
‘Be quiet,’said Bisnu. ‘You’ll wake mother.’
Their mother was awake by now. ‘Come down from there, Bisnu. I can hear a noise outside.’
‘Don’t worry,’said Bisnu, who found himself looking down on the wriggling animal which was
trying to get its paw in under the door. With his mother and Puja awake, there was no time to lose. He
had got the spear through the window, and though he could not manoeuvre it so as to strike the
panther’s head, he brought the sharp end down with considerable force on the animal’s rump.
With a roar of pain and rage, the man-eater leapt down from the steps and disappeared into the
darkness. It did not pause to see what had struck it. Certain that no human could have come upon it in
that fashion, it ran fearfully to its lair, howling until the pain subsided.
VIII
A panther is an enigma. There are occasions when he proves himself to be the most cunning animal
under the sun, and yet the very next day he will walk into an obvious trap that no self-respecting
jackal would ever go near. One day a panther will prove himself to be a complete coward and run
like a hare from a couple of dogs, and the very next he will dash in amongst half a dozen men sitting
round a camp-fire, and inflict terrible injuries on them.
It is not often that a panther is taken by surprise, as his powers of sight and hearing are very acute.
He is a master at the art of camouflage, and his spotted coat is admirably suited for the purpose. He
does not need heavy jungle to hide in. A couple of bushes, and the light and shade from surrounding
trees, are enough to make him almost invisible.
Because the Manjari panther had been fooled by Bisnu, it did not mean that he was a stupid
panther; it simply meant that he had been a little careless. And Bisnu and Puja, growing in confidence
since their midnight encounter with the animal, became a little careless themselves.
Puja was hoeing the last field above the house, and Bisnu, at the other end of the same field, was
chopping up several branches of green oak, prior to leaving the wood in the loft to dry. It was late
afternoon, and the descending sun glinted in patches on the small river. It was a time of day when only
the most desperate and daring of man-eaters would be likely to show itself.
Pausing for a moment to wipe the sweat from his brow, Bisnu glanced up at the hillside, and his
eye caught sight of a rock on the brown of the hill which seemed unfamiliar to him. Just as he was
about to look elsewhere, the round rock began to grow and then alter its shape, and Bisnu, watching in
fascination, was at last able to make out the head and forequarters of the panther. It looked enormous
from the angle at which he saw it, and for a moment he thought it was a tiger. But Bisnu knew
instinctively that it was the man-eater.
Slowly the wary beast pulled itself to its feet and began to walk round the side of the great rock.
For a second it disappeared, and Bisnu wondered if it had gone away. Then it reappeared, and the
boy was all excitement again. Very slowly and silently the panther walked across the face of the rock
until it was in a direct line with that corner of the feild where Puja was working.
With a thrill of horror, Bisnu realised that the panther was stalking his sister. He shook himself free
from the spell which had woven itself round him, and shouting hoarsely, ran forward.
‘Run, Puja, run!’ he called. ‘It’s on the hill above you!’
Puja turned to see what Bisnu was shouting about. She saw him gesticulate to the hill behind her,
looked up just in time to see the panther crouching for his spring.
With great presence of mind, she leapt down the banking of the field, and tumbled into an irrigation
ditch.
The springing panther missed its prey, lost its foothold on the slippery shale banking, and
somersaulted into the ditch a few feet away from Puja. Before the animal could recover from its
surprise, Bisnu was dashing down the slope, swinging his axe and shouting ‘Maro, Maro!’ (Kill,
Kill!).
Two men came running across the field. They, too, were armed with axes. Together with Bisnu they
made a half-circle around the snarling animal, which turned at bay and plunged at them in order to get
away. Puja wriggled along the ditch on her stomach. The men aimed their axes at the panther’s head,
and Bisnu had the satisfaction of getting in a well-aimed blow between the eyes. The animal then
charged straight at one of the men, knocked him over, and tried to get at his throat. Just then Sanjay’s
father arrived with his long spear. He plunged the end of the spear into the panther’s neck.
The panther left its victim and ran into the bushes, dragging the spear through the grass and leaving
a trail of blood on the ground. The men followed cautiously — all except the man who had been
wounded and who lay on the ground while Puja and the other womenfolk rushed up to help him.
The panther had made for the bed of the stream, and Bisnu, Sanjay’s father, and their companion
were able to follow it quite easily. The water was red where the panther had crossed the stream, and
the rocks were stained with blood. After they had gone downstream for about a furlong, they found the
panther lying still on its side at the edge of the water. It was mortally wounded, but it continued to
wave its tail like an angry cat; then even the tail lay still.
‘It is dead,’said Bisnu. ‘It will not trouble us again in this body.’
‘Let us be certain,’said Sanjay’s father, and he bent down and pulled the panther’s tail.
There was no response.
‘It is dead,’said Kalam Singh. ‘No panther would suffer such an insult were it alive!’
They cut down a long piece of thick bamboo and tied the panther to it by its feet. Then, with their
enemy hanging upside down from the bamboo pole, they started back for the village.
‘There will be a feast at my house tonight,’said Kalam Singh. ‘Everyone in the village must come.
And tomorrow we will visit all the villages in the valley, and show them the dead panther, so that
they may move about again without fear.’
‘We can sell the skin in Kemptee,’said their companion. ‘It will fetch a good price.’
‘But the claws we will give to Bisnu,’said Kalam singh, putting his arm around the boy’s
shoulders. ‘He has done a man’s work today. He deserves the claws.’
A panther’s or a tiger’s claws are considered to be lucky charms.
‘I will take only three claws,’said Bisnu. ‘One each for my mother and sister, and one for myself.
You may give the others to Sanjay and Chittru and the smaller children.’
As the sun set, a big fire was lit in the middle of the village of Manjari, and the people gathered
round it, singing and laughing. Kalam Singh killed his fattest goat, and there was meat for everyone.
IX
Bisnu was on his way home. He had just handed in his first paper, arithmetic, which he had found
quite easy. Tomorrow it would be algebra, and when he got home he could have to practise square
roots and cube roots and fractional coefficients.
Mr. Nautiyal and the entire class had been happy that he had been able to sit for the exams. He was
also a hero to them for his part in killing the panther. The story had spread through the villages with
the rapidity of a forest fire, a fire which was now raging in Kemptee town.
When he walked past the hospital, he was whistling cheerfully. Dr. Taylor waved to him from the
verandah steps.
‘How is Sanjay now?’she asked.
‘He is well,’said Bisnu.
‘And your mother and sister?’
‘They are well,’said Bisnu.
‘Are you going to get yourself a new dog?’
‘I am thinking about it,’said Bisnu. ‘At present I have a baby goat — I am teaching it to swim!’
He started down the path to the valley. Dark clouds had gathered, and there was a rumble of
thunder. A storm was imminent.
‘Wait for me!’shouted Sarru, running down the path behind Bisnu, his milk-pails clanging against
each other. He fell into step beside Bisnu.
‘Well, I hope we don’t have any more man-eaters for some time,’ he said. ‘I’ve lost a lot of money
by not being able to take milk up to Kemptee.’
‘We should be safe as long as a shikari doesn’t wound another panther. There was an old bulletwound in the man-eater’s thigh. That’s why it couldn’t hunt in the forest. The deer were too fast for
it.’
‘Is there a new postman yet?’
‘He starts tomorrow. A cousin of Mela Ram’s.’
When they reached the parting of their ways it had begun to rain a little.
‘I must hurry,’said Sarru. ‘It’s going to get heavier any minute.’
‘I feel like getting wet,’said Bisnu. ‘This time it’s the monsoon, I’m sure.’
Bisnu entered the forest on his own, and at the same time the rain came down in heavy opaque
sheets. The trees shook in the wind, the langoors chattered with excitement.
It was still pouring when Bisnu emerged from the forest, drenched to the skin. But the rain stopped
suddenly, just as the village of Manjari came in view. The sun appeared through a rift in the clouds.
The leaves and the grass gave out a sweet, fresh smell.
Bisnu could see his mother and sister in the field transplanting the rice seedlings. The menfolk
were driving the yoked oxen through the thin mud of the fields, while the children hung on to the
oxen’s tails, standing on the plain wooden harrows and with weird cries and shouts sending the
animals almost at a gallop along the narrow terraces.
Bisnu felt the urge to be with them, working in the fields. He ran down the path, his feet falling
softly on the wet earth. Puja saw him coming and waved to him. She met him at the edge of the field.
‘How did you find your paper today?’she asked.
‘Oh, it was easy.’ Bisnu slipped his hand into hers and together they walked across the field. Puja
felt something smooth and hard against her fingers, and before she could see what Bisnu was doing,
he had slipped a pair of bangles over her wrist.
‘I remembered,’ he said, with a sense of achievement.
Puja looked at the bangles and burst out: ‘But they are blue, Bhai, and I wanted red and gold
bangles!’ And then, when she saw him looking crestfallen, she hurried on: ‘But they are very pretty,
and you did remember … Actually, they’re just as nice as red and gold bangles! Come into the house
when you are ready. I have made something special for you.’
‘I am coming,’said Bisnu, turning towards the house. ‘You don’t know how hungry a man gets,
walking five miles to reach home!’
